The ides of March are come.
Ay, Caesar, but not gone.
Hail, Caesar!
Read this schedule.
Trebonius doth desire you to o'er read, at your best leisure,
this his most humble suit.
O Caesar, read mine first,
for mine's a suit that touches Caesar nearer.
Read it, great Caesar.
What touches us ourself shall be last served.
Delay not, Caesar; read it instantly.
What, is the fellow mad?
Sirrah, give place!
What, urge you your petitions in the street?
Come to the Capitol.
I wish your enterprise today may thrive.
What enterprise, Popilius?
Fare you well.
What said Popilius Lena?
He wish'd today our enterprise might thrive.
I fear our purpose is discovered.
Look how he makes to Caesar; mark him.
Casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention.
Brutus, what shall be done?
If this be known, Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
for I will slay myself.
Cassius, be constant.
Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes;
for, look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.
Trebonius knows his time, for, look you, Brutus,
he draws Mark Antony out of the way.
Where is Metellus Cimber?
Let him go and presently prefer his suit to Caesar.
He is address'd; press near and second him.
Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
What is now amiss that Caesar and his Senate must redress?
Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,
Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat an humble heart.
I must prevent thee, Cimber.
These couchings and these lowly courtesies
might fire the blood of ordinary men
and turn preordinance and first decree into the law of children.
Be not fond to think that Caesar bears such rebel blood
that will be thaw'd from the true quality
with that which melteth fools.
I mean sweet words, low-crooked court'sies,
and base spaniel-fawning.
Thy brother by decree is banished.
If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,
I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
Know, Caesar doth not wrong,
nor without cause will he be satisfied.
Is there no voice more worthy than my own,
to sound more sweetly in great Caesar's ear
for the repealing of my banish'd brother?
I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar,
desiring thee that Publius Cimber
may have an immediate freedom of repeal.
What, Brutus?
Pardon, Caesar!
Caesar, pardon!
As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall
to beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.
I could be well moved, if I were as you;
if I could pray to move, then prayers would move me;
but I am constant as the northern star,
of whose true-fix'd and resting quality
there is no fellow in the firmament.
The skies are painted with unnumber'd sparks;
they are all fire and every one doth shine;
but there's but one in all doth hold his place.
So in the world, 'tis furnish'd well with men,
and men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;
yet in the number I do know but one
that unassailable holds on his rank, unshaked of motion;
and that I am he, let me a little show it, even in this;
that I was constant Cimber should be banish'd,
and constant do remain to keep him so.
O Caesar--
Hence! Wilt thou lift up Olympus?
Great Caesar--
Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?
Speak, hands, for me!
Et tu, Brute?
Then fall, Caesar.
Liberty!
Freedom!
Tyranny is dead!
Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets!
Some to the common pulpits,
cry out, "Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!"
People and senators, be not affrighted,
fly not, stand still; ambition's debt is paid.
Go to the pulpit, Brutus.
And Cassius too.
Where's Publius?
Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
Stand fast together, lest some friend--
Talk not of standing.
Publius, good cheer, there is no harm intended to your person,
nor to no Roman else.
So tell them, Publius.
And leave us, Publius, lest the people rushing on us
should do your age some mischief.
Do so, and let no man abide this deed but we the doers.
Where is Antony?
Fled to his house amazed.
Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run
as it were doomsday.
Fates, we will know your pleasures.
That we shall die, we know;
'tis but the time and drawing days out that men stand upon.
Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
cuts off so many years of fearing death.
Grant that, and then is death a benefit;
so are we Caesar's friends
that have abridged his time of fearing death.
Stoop, Romans, stoop,
and let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood
up to the elbows, and besmear our swords.
Then walk we forth, even to the marketplace,
and waving our red weapons o'er our heads,
Let's all cry, "Peace, freedom, and liberty!"
Stoop then, and wash.
How many ages hence shall this our lofty scene be acted over
in states unborn and accents yet unknown!
How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
that now on Pompey's basis lies along no worthier than the dust.
So oft as that shall be,
so often shall the knot of us be call'd
the men that gave their country liberty.
What, shall we forth?
Ay, every man away.
Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
with the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.
Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel,
thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down,
and, being prostrate,thus he bade me say:
Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving.
Say I love Brutus and I honor him;
say I fear'd Caesar, honor'd him, and loved him.
If Brutus will vouchsafe
that Antony may safely come to him
and be resolved how Caesar hath deserved to lie in death,
Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead
so well as Brutus living,
but will follow the fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus
thorough the hazards of this untrod state
with all true faith.
So says my master Antony.
Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman;
I never thought him worse.
Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
he shall be satisfied and, by my honor, depart untouch'd.
I'll fetch him presently.
I know that we shall have him well to friend.
I wish we may, but yet have I a mind that fears him much,
and my misgiving still falls shrewdly to the purpose.
Welcome, Mark Antony.
O mighty Caesar.
Dost thou lie so low?
Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
shrunk to this little measure?
Fare thee well.
I know not, gentlemen, what you intend,
who else must be let blood, who else is rank.
If I myself, there is no hour so fit as Caesar's death's hour,
nor no instrument of half that worth as those your swords,
made rich with the most noble blood of all this world.
I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,
now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
fulfill your pleasure.
Live a thousand years, I shall not find myself so apt to die;
no place will please me so, no means of death,
as here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
the choice and master spirits of this age.
O Antony, beg not your death of us.
Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
as, by our hands and this our present act you see we do,
yet see you but our hands
and this the bleeding business they have done.
Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
and pity to the general wrong of Rome--
as fire drives out fire, so pity pity--
Hath done this deed on Caesar.
For your part, to you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony;
our arms in strength of malice,
and our hearts of brothers' temper,
do receive you in with all kind love,
good thoughts, and reverence.
Your voice shall be as strong as any man's
in the disposing of new dignities.
Only be patient till we have appeased the multitude,
beside themselves with fear,
and then we will deliver you the cause why I,
that did love Caesar when I struck him,
have thus proceeded.
I doubt not of your wisdom.
Let each man render me his bloody hand.
First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you;
next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand;
now, Decius Brutus, yours;
yours, good Metellus; yours, Cinna;
and, my valiant Casca, yours;
though last, not least in love, yours, good Trebonius.
Gentlemen all.
Alas, what shall I say?
My credit now stands on such slippery ground,
that one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
either a coward or a flatterer.
That I did love thee, Caesar, O, 'tis true.
If then thy spirit look upon us now,
shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death
to see thy Antony making his peace,
shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes, most noble,
in the presence of thy course?
Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
it would become me better
than to close in terms of friendship with thine enemies.
Pardon me, Julius.
Here wast thou bay'd, brave hart,
here didst thou fall, and here thy hunters stand,
sign'd in thy spoil, and crimson'd in thy Lethe.
and this, indeed, O world, the heart of thee.
How like a deer strucken by many princes dost thou here lie.
Mark Antony--
Pardon me, Caius Cassius.
The enemies of Caesar shall say this:
then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.
I blame you not for praising Caesar so;
but what compact mean you to have with us?
Will you be prick'd in number of our friends,
or shall we on, and not depend on you?
Therefore I took your hand,
but was indeed sway'd from the point by looking down on Caesar.
Friends am I with you all and love you all,
upon this hope that you shall give me reasons
why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.
Or else were this a savage spectacle.
Our reasons are so full of good regard that were you, Antony,
the son of Caesar, you should be satisfied.
That's all I seek; and am moreover suitor
that I may produce his body to the marketplace,
and in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
speak in the order of his funeral.
You shall, Mark Antony.
Brutus, a word with you.
You know not what you do.
Do not consent that Antony speak in his funeral.
Know you how much the people may be moved
by that he will utter?
By your pardon, I will myself into the pulpit first,
and show the reason of our Caesar's death.
What Antony shall speak,
I will protest he speaks by leave and by permission,
and that we are contented Caesar shall have
all true rites and lawful ceremonies.
It shall advantage more than do us wrong.
I know not what may fall; I like it not.
Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar's body.
You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
but speak all good you can devise of Caesar,
and say you do't by our permission,
else shall you not have any hand at all about his funeral.
and you shall speak in the same pulpit whereto I am going,
after my speech is ended.
Be it so, I do desire no more.
Prepare the body then, and follow us.
O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
that I am meek and gentle with these butchers!
Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
that ever lived in the tide of times.
Woe to the hand that shed his costly blood.
Over thy wounds now do I prophesy,
which like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips
to beg the voice and utterance of my tongue.
A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;
domestic fury and fierce civil strife
shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
blood and destruction shall be so in use,
and dreadful objects so familiar,
that mothers shall but smile
when they behold their infants quarter'd with the hands of war;
all pity choked with custom of fell deeds,
and Caesar's spirit ranging for revenge,
with Ate by his side come hot from hell,
shall in these confines with a monarch's voice cry "havoc!"
And let slip the dogs of war,
that this foul deed shall smell above the earth
with carrion men, groaning for burial.
You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?
I do, Mark Antony.
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
He did receive his letters, and is coming,
and bid me say to you by word of mouth--
O Caesar!
Thy heart is big; get thee apart and weep.
Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes,
seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine, began to water.
Is thy master coming?
He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome.
Post back with speed and tell him what hath chanced.
Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
no Rome of safety for Octavius yet;
hie hence, and tell him so.
Yet stay awhile, thou shalt not back
till I have borne this corpse into the marketplace.
There shall I try, in my oration,
how the people take the cruel issue of these bloody men,
according to the which thou shalt discourse
to young Octavius of the state of things.
Then follow me and give me audience, friends!
Cassius, go you into the other street and part the numbers.
Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;
those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
and public reasons shall be rendered Of Caesar's death.
Be patient till the last!
Romans, countrymen, and lovers.
Hear me for my cause, and be silent, that you may hear.
Believe me for mine honor,
and have respect to mine honor, that you may believe.
Censure me in your wisdom, and awake your senses,
that you may the better judge.
If there be any in this assembly,
any dear friend of Caesar's, to him I say
that Brutus' love to Caesar was no less than his.
If then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar,
this is my answer: not that I loved Caesar less,
but that I loved Rome more.
Had you rather Caesar were living and die all slaves,
than that Caesar were dead to live all freemen?
As Caesar loved me, I weep for him;
as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it;
as he was valiant, I honor him;
but as he was ambitious, I slew him!
There is tears for his love, joy for his fortune,
honor for his valor, and death for his ambition.
Who is here so base that would be a bondman?
If any, speak, for him have I offended.
Who is here so rude that would not be a Roman?
Who is here so vile that will not love his country?
If any, speak, for him have I offended.
I pause for a reply.
None, Brutus, none.
Then none have I offended.
I have done no more to Caesar than you shall do to Brutus.
The question of his death is enrolled in the Capitol,
his glory not extenuated, wherein he was worthy,
nor his offenses enforced, for which he suffered death.
Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony,
who, though he had no hand in his death,
shall receive the benefit of his dying,
a place in the commonwealth, as which of you shall not?
With this I depart--
that, as I slew my best lover for the good of Rome,
I have the same dagger for myself,
when it shall please my country to need my death.
Live!
Good countrymen, let me depart alone,
and, for my sake, stay here with Antony.
Do grace to Caesar's corpse,
and grace his speech tending to Caesar's glories,
which Mark Antony, by our permission, is allow'd to make.
I do entreat you, not a man depart, save I alone,
till Antony have spoke.
Let him go in the public chair; we will hear him.
Noble Antony, go up.
For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you.
What does he say of Brutus?
He says, for Brutus' sake,
he' beholding to us all.
'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.
This Caesar was a tyrant!
Nay, that's certain.
We are blest that Rome is rid of him.
Peace! Let us hear what Antony can say.
You gentle Romans--
Peace, ho!
Friends, Romans, countrymen...
lend me your ears!
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
The evil that men do lives after them,
the good is oft interred with their bones;
so let it be with Caesar.
The noble Brutus hath told you Caesar was ambitious;
if it were so, it was a grievous fault,
and grievously hath Caesar answer'd it.
Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest--
for Brutus is an honorable man; so are they all,
all honorable men.
Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral.
He was my friend, faithful and just to me;
but Brutus says he was ambitious,
and Brutus is an honorable man!
He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
and Brutus is an honorable man.
You all did see
that on the Lupercal I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
which he did thrice refuse.
Was this ambition?
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
and sure he is an honorable man.
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
but here I am to speak what I do know.
You all did love him once, not without cause;
what cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
O judgement, thou art fled to brutish beasts,
and men have lost their reason.
Bear with me; my heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
and I must pause till it come back to me.
Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
If thou consider rightly of the matter,
Caesar has had great wrong.
Has he, masters?
I fear there will a worse come in his place.
He would not take the crown;
therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.
If it be found so, some will dear abide it.
Ah, poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.
There's not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.
Now mark him, he begins again to speak.
But yesterday the word of Caesar
might have stood against the world.
Now lies he there, and none so poor to do him reverence.
O masters!
If I were disposed
to stir your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
I should do Brutus wrong and Cassius wrong,
who, you all know, are honorable men.
I will not do them wrong; I rather choose to wrong the dead,
to wrong myself and you, than I will wrong such honorable men.
But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar;
I found it in his closet, 'tis his will.
Let but the commons hear this testament--
which, pardon me, I do not mean to read--
and they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds
and dip their napkins in his sacred blood,
yea, beg a hair of him for memory, and, dying,
mention it within their wills,
bequeathing it as a rich legacy unto their issue.
Will you be patient?
Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it;
it is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.
You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;
and, being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
it will inflame you, it will make you mad.
'Tis good you know not that you are his heirs,
for if you should, O, what would come of it!
Will you be patient?
Will you stay awhile?
I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it.
I fear I wrong the honorable men
whose daggers have stabb'd Caesar; I do fear it.
They were traitors! Honorable men?
The will! The will!
The will!
You will compel me then to read the will?
Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar,
that I may show you him that made the will.
Shall I descend, and will you give me leave?
If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
You all do know this mantle.
I remember the first time ever Caesar put it on;
'twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,
that day he overcame the Nervii.
Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through;
see what a rent the envious Casca made;
through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb'd;
and as he pluck'd his cursed steel away,
Mark how the blood of Caesar follow'd it,
as rushing out of doors,
to be resolved if Brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no;
for Brutus, you all know, was Caesar's angel.
Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him.
This was the most unkindest cut of all;
for when the noble Caesar saw him stab, ingratitude,
more strong than traitors' arms, quite vanquish'd him.
Then burst his mighty heart,
and, in his mantle muffling up his face,
even at the base of Pompey's statue,
which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell!
What a fall was there, my countrymen.
Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,
whilst bloody treason flourish'd over us.
O, now you weep, and I perceive you feel the dint of pity.
These are gracious drops.
Kind souls, what weep you when you but behold
our Caesar's vesture wounded?
Look you here, here is himself,
marr'd, as you see, with traitors!
Oh!
- O piteous spectacle. - O noble Caesar.
Woeful day.
Villains. Traitors.
O most bloody sight!
We will be revenged!
Good friends, sweet friends,
let me not stir you up to such a sudden flood of mutiny.
They that have done this deed are honorable.
What private griefs they have,
alas, I know not, that made them do it,
but they are wise and honorable,
and will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.
I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts.
I am no orator, as Brutus is; but, as you know me all,
a plain blunt man, that loved my friend,
and that they know full well that gave me public leave
to speak of him.
For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth, action,
nor utterance, nor the power of speech, to stir men's blood.
I only speak right on;
I tell you that which you yourselves do know;
show you sweet Caesar's wounds, poor, poor dumb mouths,
and bid them speak for me!
But were I Brutus, and Brutus Antony,
there were an Antony would ruffle up your spirits
and put a tongue in every wound of Caesar's
that should move the stones of Rome to rise and mutiny!
Why, friends, you go to do you know not what.
Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?
Alas, you know not; I must tell you then.
You have forgot the will I told you of.
Here is the will, and under seal of Caesar.
To every Roman citizen...
he gives seventy-five drachmas.
Hear me with patience.
Moreover, he hath left you all his walks, his private arbors,
and new-planted orchards, on this side Tiber;
he hath left them you, and to your heirs forever--
common pleasures, to walk abroad and recreate yourselves.
Here was a Caesar!
When comes such another?
Never! Never!
Now let it work.
Mischief, thou art afoot, take thou what course thou wilt.
How now, fellow?
Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.
Where is he?
He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house.
And thither will I straight to visit him.
He comes upon a wish.
Fortune is merry, and in this mood will give us anything.
I heard him say Brutus and Cassius
are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.
Be like they had some notice of the people,
how I had moved them.
Come, bring me to Octavius.
I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar,
and things unluckily charge my fantasy.
I have no will to wander forth of doors,
yet something leads me forth.
What is your name?
Whither are you going?
Where do you dwell?
Are you a married man or a bachelor?
Answer every man directly.
Ay, and briefly.
Ay, and wisely.
Ay, and truly, you were best.
What is my name?
Whither am I going?
Where do I dwell?
Am I a married man or a bachelor?
Hmm, then, to answer every man directly and briefly,
wisely and truly: wisely I say, I am a bachelor.
That's as much as to say they are fools that marry.
You'll bear me a bang for that, I fear.
Proceed directly.
Directly, I am going to Caesar's funeral.
As a friend or an enemy?
As a friend.
That matter is answered directly.
For your dwelling, briefly.
Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.
Your name, sir, truly.
Truly, my name is Cinna.
Tear him to pieces; he's a conspirator!
I'm Cinna the poet! I'm Cinna the poet!
Tear him for his bad verses! Tear him for his bad verses!
I am not Cinna the conspirator!
It is no matter, his name's Cinna.
Pluck but his name out of his heart, and turn him going.
Tear him! Tear him!
Tear him!